1\) Why are you studying computer science? What got you interested in the field? What do you hope to achieve during and after your studies?

I began studying computer science after working for a company called Kuelap, Inc., which is currently developing an open-source core banking software platform. I have been doing manual quality assurance for them for about a year and a half. To better enable me to do my job and to start doing automated testing, I began studying CSS, HTML, and JavaScript as well as utilizing Jira, Github, and Gitlab. It was so exciting to see some of the small, uncomplicated programs that I created working. I started developing a simple family website from scratch and it was interesting to see how the different parts of the code were able to come together and make something much more dynamic.   
One of Kuelap’s goals is to help the under- and unbanked around the world. Since starting there, I have learned of communities in Africa where their banking consists of a village box where communal money is stored. Being able to offer these communities low-cost banking options would open them up more fully to microloans and microfinance options. Other banks are using simple Excel spreadsheets to track deposit and loan accounts, which can have a huge potential for human error as well as making it difficult to share or track information. A well-developed program can help alleviate human error by automatically factoring interest and fees and tracking the maturation of loans as well as correctly applying payments. We take for granted the ease of access to our banking information, the ability to track our funds, and the simplicity of applying for necessary loans. Programming is a way to truly affect the lives of people on the other side of the globe as well as people in your hometown.

2\) What do you find most challenging about studying computer science? How have you overcome these challenges?

One of the biggest challenges of computer science is how ever-changing it is. Much like swimming in a river against the flow, if you ever stop learning, the pace at which it advances will quickly leave you behind. However, I also find that one of the most interesting parts of computer science. There is always something new to learn and discover and there is always room for development, both personally and professionally. Learning programming can be frustrating, as even the smallest error will make the whole program not work. However, the excitement when you find those errors, can correct them, and the program runs for the first time is worth the frustration.

3\) If you could not be a computer scientist, what career would you pursue and why?

If I could not be a computer scientist, I would go into the electrical technology field, specifically home automation. I have studied residential wiring and find the science behind electricity fascinating. Previously, I planned the circuits and ran the wiring in a basement renovation that I completed. This was a huge learning experience and was thrilling each time I finished something correctly.  At the time, home automation was not a cost-effective option for this renovation, but my interest was piqued. The ability to control our homes remotely and the logic behind those controls has a great appeal to me. I strongly believe that home automation will become a vital industry in construction and will make some significant changes in not only the industry but also how we live our daily lives.

4\) Describe a situation where you served as a leader in your technical community, your university, or your broader community. Explain in detail your role and how individuals responded to your leadership.

I took a Logic & Controls class in my electrical technology field. One of our final tasks as a class was to develop a simple program to fill a bag to a certain point along a series of conveyor belts. I stepped forward at the beginning of the project as the group leader. I assigned partners or small team groups and gave them specific assignments for developing the logic necessary for each of the machines. In deciding teams and partnerships, I had to take into consideration the interpersonal dynamics and the level of understanding of each member of the group. I managed the timeline of when each part of the project must be completed and was the one everyone came to when there were complications. I didn’t have the strongest understanding of the concepts we had been studying, but I knew what questions to ask and where to find the information that was needed, often referring to those in the class who did have a better understanding. Some parts of the program we had to develop as a whole class. During these times I led the discussion, making sure to get the necessary input from each student and making sure everyone had a sound comprehension of why we were taking the steps we were taking along the way. The project went quite smoothly and was done ahead of schedule. While it didn’t work on the first try, some minimal troubleshooting enabled us to finish the project successfully. Our instructor was quite impressed with our teamwork and how quickly and efficiently we completed the task he had set out for us. Each of the students was able to participate and fully understand the logic behind the project and why it worked. Overall, it was one of the most successful group projects I’ve been involved in.
