# The Importance of Financial Inclusion

By Riana Franklin Allen

If I suddenly found myself in possession of a large sum of money, I would partner with companies focused on financial inclusion such as The Center for Financial Inclusion,  Opportunity International or Lend With Care to help develop banking opportunities, extend financial education and offer as many microfinance loans to women in developing countries as I was able.   
Financial inclusion, when it was first introduced, was primarily about offering microloans to the poor. However, as it has developed, financial inclusion now includes offering other banking opportunities, such as savings accounts, insurance, and financial literacy education initiatives to those who have not had access to those options previously. The World Bank states, “Financial inclusion means that individuals and businesses have access to useful and affordable financial products and services that meet their needs – transactions, payments, savings, credit and insurance – delivered in a responsible and sustainable way.”[^1]  
While small loans are generally the first thing to come to mind when discussing microfinance, it has been proven that the poor are desperate to have the ability to effectively save money.  In an article in The Guardian, Claire Innes is quotes as saying, “While credit is important, it doesn't necessarily have a beneficial impact in all cases, and in some cases can do harm. Evidence also shows that people want savings, and demand for savings accounts outstrips demand for credit in sub-Saharan Africa.”[^2] Often, those without access to formal banking options, save money in cash which has a much greater chance of being stolen or misappropriated. Another option that some use is the purchase of something like a chicken, which isn’t readily interchangeable for the goods they may be in need of. The ability to save securely and with the option of interest can make a significant impact on the impoverished.  
Financial literacy and education should be a major part of any financial inclusion plan. Financial literacy can be defined as “the ability to discern financial choices, discuss money and financial issues without (or despite) discomfort, plan for the future, and respond competently to life events that affect every-day financial decisions, including events in the general economy.”[^3]  This must be an important part of financial inclusion so that the banking and insurance options that are offered to the underprivileged have a better opportunity to help rather than hurt them. In an article on the implications of financial literacy, Ghirmai Kefela states, “Mounting evidence shows that those who are less financially literate are more likely to have problems with debt, are less likely to save, are more likely to engage in high-cost mortgages, and are less likely to plan for retirement. Without a certain level of financial literacy, consumers might not purchase the financial products and services they need and might be ill-equipped to fully appreciate their rights and responsibilities as financial consumers, and to understand and appropriately manage the variety of risks.”[^4] These risks can be mitigated by appropriate financial education.  
While microfinance loans should not be the only focus of financial inclusion, they can play an important role. Lend With Care states some important facts when discussing microcredit: “Microfinance can help poor people; however it may not always be appropriate. For example, when small loans are to be used for business purposes, microcredit is most useful for those entrepreneurs who have already identified a productive and profitable economic opportunity, possess the necessary entrepreneurial skills, can capitalise on it if they have access to credit and are capable of making the regular repayments in order to have continued access. The very poorest people may be unable to repay even a small loan and providing them with a grant to help them build assets or start an enterprise may be more appropriate. In fact, they are generally more in need of help in meeting their basic needs such as food and shelter. Providing credit to those who cannot use it productively could push already vulnerable poor people into debt and in fact worsen their situation.”[^5] With that said, there is a time and a place for microcredit and it should be offered when possible.   
While my statement that I would loan predominantly to women might seem sexist, there is research based information on why this can be beneficial. While I don’t think that women are intrinsically more valuable than men, it has been proven that when we build up women in countries where gender inequality is endemic, we improve more lives than just those particular women.  An article by *The Guardian* states, “... educating girls and women is especially effective because when we educate them, the benefits are felt throughout the whole community. It’s a magic multiplier in the development equation… It is an attractive proposition: invest in women and girls, and the benefits flow not only to them but everyone around them, too. Sadly, the reverse is also true. Deny girls and women education and the whole community suffers, not just them as individuals.”[^6] This is true with education, and it is equally applicable to financial improvements. Microcredit opportunities can help to empower women around the world and enable them to improve their lives, the lives of their families, and their communities as a whole.  It has also been shown that, “Despite women’s lower objective creditworthiness, they repay their loans better than male clients.” [^7]  
	I believe that investing in financial inclusion, in all its forms, is the best way in which I could change the world for the better.

[^1]:  The World Bank. (2017). Financial inclusion: Overview. Retrieved from http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion/overview 

[^2]:  von Vark, C. (2013). Banishing poverty through banking. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2013/apr/24/banishing-poverty-through-banking

[^3]:  Vitt, L. A., Anderson, C., Kent, J., Lyter, D. M., Siegenthaler, J. K., & Ward, J. (2000). Personal finance and the rush to competence: Financial literacy education in the U.S. Middleburg, VA: Fannie Mae Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.isfs.org/documents-pdfs/repfinliteracy.pdf

[^4]:  Kefela, G. (2011). Implications of Financial Literacy in Developing Countries. *African Jounal Of Business Management*, *5*(9), 3699-3705. doi: 10.5897/AJBM09.297

[^5]:  Microfinance from CARE International UK. (2018). Retrieved from https://lendwithcare.org/info/about-us/about-microfinance

[^6]:  Gillard, Julia, and Cate Blanchett. "Educate Women And Their Community Will Prosper. Deny Them Education And The World Will Suffer | Julia Gillard And Cate Blanchett". *The Guardian*, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/01/educate-women-and-their-community-will-prosper-deny-them-education-and-the-world-will-suffer. Accessed 3 Oct 2018\.

[^7]:  D’Espallier, B., Guérin, I., & Mersland, R. (2011). Women and Repayment in Microfinance: A Global Analysis. *World Development*, *39*(5), 758-772. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2010.10.008