Women are significantly underrepresented in computer science programs in secondary education, only comprising about 19% of STEM graduates (https://dataprot.net/statistics/women-in-tech-statistics). In the United States, women represented only 22.7% of computer programmers in 2018 (https://datausa.io/profile/soc/computer-programmers). However, a greater concern has been that those who do try to complete these degrees, or do so and begin working in the tech industry often face greater harassment and discrimination than their male counterparts. More than 40% of women in tech say they have faced harassment recently ([https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/16/40percent-of-women-in-tech-say-theyve-been-harassed-by-boss-or-investor.html](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/16/40percent-of-women-in-tech-say-theyve-been-harassed-by-boss-or-investor.html)). Women leave these fields at a 45% higher rate than men. Even those who are able to complete their degree, find a position and handle the harassment are often overlooked for promotion opportunities.   
In 2017, “Generation X-ers (aged 34-51) in tech are being hired 33% less than their workforce representation.” and receiving lower promotion rates. ([https://www.marketwatch.com/story/silicon-valley-has-an-age-problem-2017-09-26](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/silicon-valley-has-an-age-problem-2017-09-26)) The average age of developers is 29, the median being 27 ([https://recruitinginnovation.com/blog/diversity-in-tech/](https://recruitinginnovation.com/blog/diversity-in-tech/)). The world of computer programming is often considered a young man’s game, and that is what many companies are looking to hire: young men.  
I am a woman, over the age of 40, working to finish her degree in computer science and begin a career in programming. The odds are stacked against me, but I know that with persistence and dedication, I can do what I set out to. Hopefully, in doing so, help to pave the path for those who follow after.  
I have often felt I needed to know more and do more in order to be considered on par with my work or classmates. There is a feeling of needing to prove that I can perform as well, and often better, than those around me to be considered of value.   
As a woman, I have worked and gone to school in several male-dominated career fields, including studying electrical technology. There too, I often felt the need to prove that I could “keep up with the boys.” Which generally translated into me doing more work, with more precision, than my male counterparts. Yet, even in doing so, I faced harassment from instructors and had to push for recognition in the classroom. After several classes with the same classmates, they started to respect the fact that I could work as hard or harder than them, but whenever a new teacher or classmate came into the group, I had to prove myself all over again. This mindset also translates into the technology fields and software development.   
In my last job, I was recommended for a quality assurance position, though I had no previous experience in software development or anything related. I found that my coworkers often expected me to have a level of foundational knowledge because I was older than most of them, though I didn’t have the education or experience that is often associated with my age. This meant I had to ask them basic questions in order to better understand the processes that they took for granted. 

What systemic bias or discrimination would you face if you applied for a job in the technology industry of your country?

Think about applying for a job in the technology industry of the country listed above. Would you face employment discrimination on the basis of your identity or background?  
Please provide specific examples and (optionally) statistics. If you experienced discrimination while applying for a job, please provide details.  
Outreachy Organizers strongly encourage you to write your personal stories. We want you to know that we won't judge your writing style, grammar, or spelling.

As an older woman, and a mother, reentering the workforce after more than a decade and a half of raising my family, I have found it difficult to be considered for positions I know that I could excel in. It is a challenge on a resume to convey the skills and advantages that my unique life experiences bring to the table in a way that overcomes a general bias against stay-at-home parents and mothers specifically. A lot of my experiences raising a family and managing a household would directly translate into benefits for an employer.

In following my ex-husband’s military career and adjusting to a growing family, we have moved cities over 15 times, including an international move and the return trip. This is in addition to smaller moves along the way. In organizing and planning these moves, I have had to prioritize and adapt to unpredictable decisions from the military chain of command and adjust to the needs of our family. I have handled chaos with calm and adjusted to new cultures and environments. I have taken advantage of opportunities presented in each new place and used them to better myself and my family. I can adapt these skills to any working environment to better handle the chaos that can come with deadlines and adjust to handle ever-changing work requirements.

In managing a household of seven very distinct individuals, I have learned to appreciate the varied strengths and helped each of us overcome or strengthen weaknesses. I have also learned how best to work together as a team, even with personality conflicts. I have learned how to motivate the unmotivated and share the load so each person can take on appropriate responsibilities that challenge them and help them to grow. I am comfortable leading and comfortable following and understand when to do which.

During my time raising my family, I have had the opportunity to homeschool my children which has given me the chance to strategically plan and follow through on developing a unique curriculum for each child. This has helped me to better relay information in simple and concise ways, and to work with different learning styles. There were a number of things I had to re-learn which taught me a level of humility. It also taught me the important lesson that there is a tutorial out there for just about anything you need to know.

I have learned a greater level of life-balance as I’ve held down a part-time job, attended school full time, and handled all of the household and family duties while my husband deployed for months at a time. There was a point, for three months, where I was working approximately 20 hours per week, doing college assignments that equaled 40 hours per week all while my husband was deployed. During that time I still made it a priority to spend one-on-one time with each of my children and to make sure we attended school and church activities. It was a busy time, but I was able to balance all of those responsibilities and still find time to keep myself supported and balanced. The ability to find a satisfactory work/life balance is a necessary skill, and I have developed it well. I was also able to maintain a 4.0-grade point average in my college classes.  
   
While living in England, I had the opportunity to go on an 18-country, 8,000-mile road trip with a friend and our 9 children. This experience taught me a greater appreciation for other cultures and a deeper understanding that the way I’ve always done things isn’t the only way. I have learned to ask questions when I don’t understand and to accept that there is more than one “right” way of doing something. This trip also expanded my ability to multitask and manage numerous personality types into a functional team.

The majority of these skills, while extremely beneficial in a business environment, are overlooked because that work experience doesn’t “count”.  The title of “Homemaker” isn’t something that is well respected by many, even though the skills necessary to manage a home and family and track a busy schedule translate directly into a workplace.

Does your learning environment have few people who share your identity or background? Please provide details.  
Contributing to free and open-source software takes some skill. You may have already learned some basic skills through university or college classes, specialized schools, online classes, online resources, or with a mentor, friend, family member or co-worker.  
Does any of your learning environments have few people who share your identity or background? How did your identity or background differ from the majority of people in this learning environment?  
 In Nebraska, only 7% of the Bachelor's degrees were earned by those 40 years or older (https://ccpe.nebraska.gov/files/MeetingAppendices2018.06.14FL-Degrees.pdf). 

I am the epitome of a non-traditional student. I am a 40-year-old, female, single mother of 5 who has bounced around following my ex-husband’s military career around the country, and beyond. For 23 years, I have attempted several degrees as I have raised my family, but frequent military moves have prevented me from advancing in any position or completing a course of study.  I have studied cosmetology, hospitality management, and electrical technology, among others, and am working to finish my Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science. While this may seem to be an eclectic mix of skills, I have found that all of my educational and life experiences have combined to make me look at problems from a different perspective and to understand things in a unique way. For example, in my computer architecture class, I was probably the only student there who had actually wired a gate switch, which I had done while studying logics and controls in my electrical technology program.

While I see my life experiences as advantageous, it also sets me apart from the more traditional students. Often, when in class, the information seems geared for a younger audience, or for those who have different life experiences than I do as an older student. I found that the math classes were often a struggle as it had been a long while since I had taken the prerequisites and stood in need of a refresher course.

It often seems that the younger students have more time and energy to put into developing friendships with each other and are uninterested in developing those relationships with older students. Especially in an online educational situation, the lack of connection can mean less feedback on projects and missed opportunities for growth. 

What systemic bias or discrimination have you faced while building your skills?  
Outreachy projects often require applicants to know some basic skills. Those skills might include programming, user experience, documentation, illustration, and graphical design, or data science. You may have already learned some basic skills through university or college classes, specialized schools, online classes, online resources, or with a mentor, friend, family member, or co-worker.  
In these settings, have you faced systemic bias or discrimination? Have you been discouraged from accessing these resources because of your identity or background?  
Please provide specific examples and (optionally) statistics.  
Part of the concern for women in tech has been that women are significantly underrepresented in computer science programs in secondary education, only comprising about 19% of STEM graduates. 

In my own work experience, I found that the men were more readily able to socialize and build relationships that benefited them in the work environment. They were able to ask for help and feedback in a non-judgemental environment. I often felt like I was unable to ask for help when I needed it and was told on several occasions that I should figure it out on my own. 

I often felt that I was being judged on different criteria than my younger, single, male counterparts. If I needed extra help or time, I have had to prove that it was not because of my family obligations. Where a man is often admired when he takes time to do something related to his family, a woman is expected to and looked down on if she doesn’t, but still penalized if she does.

