

Final Project

Riana Franklin Allen  
CMIS 111 Section 7380   
Social Networking and Cyber Security Best Practices  
University of Maryland \- University College  
Professor: Omar Zevallos

Due: 25 November 2018  
## Case Study 1: Securing Your Home Computer

When purchasing a new computer, the first place to start is a study of the security of different operating systems. When looking at desktops or laptops, rather than tablets or phones, Windows is the most commonly used operating system, though not always the most secure[^1]. Windows 10, for example, includes Windows Defender. Windows Defender has become much more reliable in recent years, but most agree[^2][^3] that it is simply not sufficient to keep a computer safe on its own. MacOS Mojave has several security benefits, including FileVault to encrypt data and System Integrity Protection or SIP which makes sure malware cannot change critical systems.[^4] Linux is generally considered the most secure operating system[^5] because it is an open-source software that is reviewed constantly by the tech community. Whatever the system, it is important to make sure the necessary updates are completed promptly. Hackers can find vulnerabilities even in the most secure operating systems. These updates and patches are created to help reduce this risk[^6].  

Once a base operating system has been chosen, in this case, a PC with Windows 10, it is important to check out the settings of that computer and make sure they are sufficiently secure. Start by adding a password to your login screen. Many computers are now offering two-factor authentication options such as fingerprint scanning or PINs. However, this should not replace a secure password. This password should be at least eight to fifteen characters in length and include uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters for the most security. Avoid using words or patterns that are readily guessed. Do not use the same password for multiple accounts and change the password regularly. Be sure to log out if it is no longer in use and be careful who is allowed access to the computer.  

One of the most basic settings for computer protection from the internet is the firewall. In the case of Windows 10, Windows Defender includes a firewall. A firewall is a type of software that filters internet traffic flow to the computer in one or more of three ways: packet filtering, proxy service, or stateful inspections.[^7] No firewall is effective if it is not set up correctly. It is generally as simple as enabling the firewall in both private as well as public networks. If a firewall is not enabled, this can allow malware to corrupt the computer or hackers to be able to access the information stored on it[^8].  

Next, even with pre-programmed security software, it is still advisable to download secondary security software and keep it up to date. There are several free options out there, such as AVG and Avast. Norton and McAfee have been in the market of paid-for antivirus services for a long time and are well respected. These antivirus programs were originally developed to “develop detect and remove computer viruses,”[^9] but are now also useful for handling other malware programs and threats to the security of a computer. Once downloaded, Norton will take precedence over Windows Defender and includes antivirus software as well as a firewall. The Norton Antivirus package does not cover most spyware. This can be done with an anti-spyware product, such as Norton’s Power Eraser software.  

Using any computer on the internet has some inherent risks. However, some browsers are more secure than others. Google Chrome is generally considered the most secure browser, with Mozilla Firefox coming in behind and Microsoft Internet Explorer being considered quite unsafe.[^10] Any browser, however, is only as secure as the user utilizing it. If a user is clicking on suspect ads or allowing pop-ups, their experience will be much different than someone using reasonable care in their internet browsing. Google Chrome has settings that can restrict access to pop-up ads and is often updated to scan for harmful downloads.[^11] An additional level of personal privacy can be created by browsing in “incognito” or “private mode. This will keep the browser from saving your browsing history, cookies, site data, and information entered in forms.[^12] This can be helpful for sites that like to track your online movement after logging in to their site, such as Facebook. However, this only affects the information that is stored on your computer, like cookies. It does not affect what has been shared online, with an internet service provider, or the owner of the network through which the information is accessed.[^13]  

Several steps can be taken to ensure a safer browsing experience and more security online. The first is to never download information from an unknown source. When receiving an email with attachments, make sure the email is from a known contact and an attachment is expected. When receiving an email from a business or banking service, be wary of any links provided. For example, if an email from a bank was received and the user wanted to confirm the information provided, do not follow any links from the email. Open a new, possibly incognito tab and type in the web address manually. Even if a link appears valid, Unicode can be used to create website addresses that appear valid but are phishing schemes set up to collect user information[^14]. Next, make sure the website is secure. Secure websites will generally have a small lock next to the address and will begin with https://, the final ‘s’ indicating that it is secure. Clicking on the lock icon can access the certificate information and confirm that it is valid.   

When logging in to an account, create a unique username and password. Again, the password should be at least eight characters and include uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters for the best security. Some programs create and save passwords, called password managers. While these have their definite benefits, they are also vulnerable to attack from hackers and should be used with caution and awareness[^15]. Users should also be aware of the risks associated with storing billing information on applications, as this is also a vulnerable area[^16].  Be sure to log out after completing the necessary transactions.  
There are always risks associated with any online activity. A firewall, anti-virus, and anti-spyware software have become as necessary as a basic operating system. The cautious user can mitigate some online risks by being aware and careful of the websites they visit, intentional in the programs and applications they download, and skeptical of emails that are “too good to be true.” Care and consideration of passwords and their storage is also a vital part of online security. When all of these actions are taken, a user can enjoy their time online while limiting the risks at which they put their computer and their personal information.

## Case Study 2: Guidance for a Family Member Using Social Networking Sites

Social media has become a huge part of today’s culture. When a child becomes a teenager, one of their first acts is often to create social media accounts. My oldest child is currently twelve and is already chomping at the bit to get his accounts. There have been several studies that have shown the positive side of how social media can help teenagers find and develop supportive relationships with peers[^17][^18] as well as extending intergenerational relationships[^19]. Of course, not all of the research has determined that social media is beneficial to youngsters. Some fear that the desire to belong can cause children to act inappropriately or to become depressed when they do not feel like they fit in[^20]. On social media, it is very easy for children to compare their real lives to the online implied perfection of their peers[^21] as well as decreasing real-life interactions.     

However, before children should be allowed to create their accounts there is a level of training and preparation that needs to happen. One of the most important things a parent can do to protect their children online is to teach them how to separate their online experiences from their self-worth. If children can disassociate their identities from their online ones, they are more likely to make healthy, well-thought-out decisions regarding their social media choices.  For example, if a child realizes how many friends they have IRL (in real life) is not determined by how many people they have connected to on Facebook, they are less likely to indiscriminately add “friends” that they do not personally know. If their self-esteem is not driven by how many likes or retweets their picture on their Twitter account receives, they are less likely to post dangerous or offensive content online or to have the content they post open for just anyone to see.  

There are other ways in which a parent can help their child stay safe in this age of online dangers. My first rule for technology is that it must be used in the public spaces of the home. The computer is used in the study or the kitchen and phones and tablets are not allowed in bedrooms. We also restrict the amount of access the children have to screen time in general and social media specifically. Next, I make sure that, as a parent, I have access to my child’s account information. As I will be the one who will set them up, I will make sure I have any passwords and necessary information to access all accounts, whether it is email, social media, or text messaging apps. I will receive notifications if information on those accounts has been changed, such as a password being reset.   

Once the accounts are created, it is important to check the privacy settings. For Facebook, under privacy settings, the first step is to control who has access to their posts. All future posts can be set to be viewed only by friends, or friends except acquaintances and do not need to be viewable publicly. They can review all posts in which they are tagged before accepting the information on their timeline, as well as limiting who can see posts they share with others.  

My child will only be allowed to “friend” those people that he knows from real life. His family members live a long way away and we move regularly, so it will be beneficial for him to be able to keep in contact with those kids he grows close to. However, he does not need to add people just to increase his “stats” or have a large friend group online to which he has no real-life connection. The next privacy settings on Facebook include how my child can be found, and these will be set as strictly as possible. Also, their information does not need to be viewable to search engines outside of Facebook. There will be limitations for who can post on their timelines, who can see the posts in which they are tagged, and allow for review of posts in which they are tagged. There is no need for their location to be viewable on social media, so location data will be turned off, as will facial recognition. I will also limit the information that is provided to advertisers and specifically limit ads relating to alcohol being posted.  

On Twitter, he will have the same basic restrictions of who he can follow and who can follow him. Tweets will be protected, meaning they will only be viewable to those I have approved. Location settings will be turned off. Tagging will be set to either only those he follows or completely turned off. Discoverability will be limited to those who know his email address, and he will only be able to receive direct messages from those he follows as well. For safety, sensitive content will be hidden.  

There are many texting applications, such as Google Hangouts, WhatsApp or SnapChat. Because of the difficulty in monitoring SnapChats, my children will not be using that application. My son uses Google Hangouts to communicate with others from school for projects and fun. The same restrictions as to use apply, in that he is only allowed to message friends that he knows, all messaging must be done in public areas of the home, and, as the parent, I must have access to his account information.   

In the years leading up to this, we have already been discussing appropriate internet behavior, both what is expected of him and what is acceptable from others. We have had many discussions about limiting the information that is posted online, such as when and where we are going on vacations, our current locations, and personal information which might make it easier for scam artists to find and potentially hurt us. We have discussed the disconnect between what we see posted online and the reality that lives behind the screen to try to reduce some of the comparisons it is so easy to make, to our detriment. We have discussed the fact that it is difficult to verify information online, so while he may think he is chatting with a peer, it could be an adult with nefarious intent. As we have discussed in-person bullying, we have also discussed how easily this can be done online. We encourage an open dialogue with all of our children about their experiences, both online and off[^22].  We monitor their communications to make sure they are speaking appropriately to their peers and that they are not on the receiving end of online bullying, or inappropriate communications from others.  

Should my son decide that following these rules is too difficult, or if I should find inappropriate content, there will be consequences related to that.  If phones and electronics are used in private spaces, they can easily be taken away. I will regularly be monitoring their accounts and should passwords be changed without prior notification, they will lose access to those accounts until they are willing and able to share the login credentials. If my child decided it was appropriate to begin bullying others, all social media would be restricted until we had resolved this behavior and worked to mitigate any damage that might have been done.  Any content that is received from others that might be inappropriate, would immediately mean a block for those individuals and reporting to whatever authority might need to be informed.    

The best way I can encourage my children to have a healthy relationship with social media and their digital life is to emulate that for them myself[^23]. Between limiting the time and energy I give to social media and taking care when posting, I hope that they can learn good habits by my example. I feel that it’s important for my children to have an online presence and to learn to utilize those experiences for their benefit. However, I also feel that their online security is of the utmost importance, and will not hesitate to do what I feel is necessary to protect them, either from themselves or from those who might seek to hurt them. I believe that, through proper education, carefully monitored accounts, and proper privacy and security settings, my child can have a positive online experience.

[^1]:  Desktop Operating System Market Share Worldwide | StatCounter Global Stats. (2018). Retrieved from http://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/desktop/worldwide\#monthly-201708-201709-bar

[^2]:  Williams, M. (2018). Windows Defender review. Retrieved from https://www.techradar.com/uk/reviews/windows-defender

[^3]:  Rubenking, N. (2018). Microsoft Windows Defender Security Center. Retrieved from https://uk.pcmag.com/antivirus/25697/microsoft-windows-defender-security-center

[^4]:  macOS \- Security. (2018). Retrieved from https://www.apple.com/uk/macos/security/

[^5]:  Taylor, D. (2018). Why Linux is better than Windows or macOS for security. Retrieved from https://www.computerworld.com/article/3252823/linux/why-linux-is-better-than-windows-or-macos-for-security.html

[^6]:  The Importance of General Software Updates and Patches. (2018). Retrieved from https://uk.norton.com/internetsecurity-how-to-the-importance-of-general-software-updates-and-patches.html

[^7]:  Tyson, J. (2018). How Firewalls Work. Retrieved from https://computer.howstuffworks.com/firewall1.htm

[^8]:  Ranbe, R. (2018). What Happens if a Firewall Is Disabled?. Retrieved from https://smallbusiness.chron.com/happens-firewall-disabled-62134.html

[^9]:  Wikipedia contributors. (2018, October 15). Antivirus software. In *Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia*. Retrieved 12:11, November 13, 2018, from [https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antivirus\_software\&oldid=864222386](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antivirus_software&oldid=864222386)

[^10]:  What is the Safest Web Browser? Chrome, Firefox, IE, Opera, and Safari Comparison Chart « TipTopSecurity. (2014). Retrieved from https://tiptopsecurity.com/safest-web-browser-chrome-firefox-ie-opera-safari-comparison-chart/

[^11]:  Ranked: Security and privacy for the most popular web browsers in 2018\. (2018). Retrieved from https://www.expressvpn.com/blog/best-browsers-for-privacy/

[^12]:  Browse in private \- Android \- Google Chrome Help. (2018). Retrieved from https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/95464?co=GENIE.Platform%3DAndroid\&hl=en

[^13]:  Connell, M. (2018). You are not very incognito in incognito mode. Retrieved from https://www.computerworld.com/article/3186941/web-browsers/you-are-not-very-incognito-in-incognito-mode.html

[^14]:  Lovejoy, B. (2017). PSA: This spoof Apple site illustrates the sophistication of today’s phishing attacks. Retrieved from https://9to5mac.com/2017/04/20/how-to-spot-a-phishing-attempt-fake-apple-site/

[^15]:  Tulloch, M. (2018). Do password managers keep you secure — or give you a false sense of security?. Retrieved from http://techgenix.com/are-password-managers-security/

[^16]:  Mayer, C. (2018). Don’t Store Credit Card Details On Your Browser | Fiscal Tiger. Retrieved from https://www.fiscaltiger.com/storing-credit-card-information-website-safe/

[^17]:  Thompson, C. (2018). Teenagers and social networking – it might actually be good for them. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/05/teens-social-networking-good-for-them

[^18]:  Hurley, K. (2018). Social Media and Teens: How Does Social Media Affect Mental Health?. Retrieved from https://www.psycom.net/social-media-teen-mental-health

[^19]:  Collin, Philippa. (2015). Social media and the wellbeing of children and young people: A literature review. 10.13140/RG.2.1.3296.6885. 

[^20]: (2018). Retrieved from https://www.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Childrens-Commissioner-for-England-Life-in-Likes-3.pdf

[^21]:  The Impact of Social Media on Emotional Health. (2017). Retrieved from https://www.cbhs.com.au/health-well-being-blog/blog-article/2017/05/17/the-impact-of-social-media-on-emotional-health

[^22]:  Robinson, E. (2012). Parental involvement in preventing and responding to cyberbullying. Retrieved from https://aifs.gov.au/cfca/publications/parental-involvement-preventing-and-responding-cyberbullying

[^23]:  Thompson, C. (2013). Teenagers and social networking – it might actually be good for them. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/05/teens-social-networking-good-for-them
