Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn was arguably one of the greatest artists not only of his day but in all of history.  Were he to come back to life in the here and now, I think his favorite app would likely be Instagram.  Rembrandt found a poignant beauty in the world around him and an amazing eye for detail. I know I would be fascinated to see his take on our modern life. The contrast he used to lead the audience’s focus and to help tell the story he was narrating was impressive.  He had a wonderful ability to capture the emotion and vulnerability of not only people but everyday scenes as well.  And we can’t forget he was a great lover of a good “selfie”.

As I was wandering through the National Gallery in London, I was shocked to see the portrait come to life.  I was studying one of my favorite pieces when something seemed to change.  The expressive eyes, the small cap, and even the broach on his frock coat came into greater focus as I watched.  Soon, it was as though I was studying a photograph, until he suddenly stepped clear of the frame and turned to look around. To say the least, I was shocked\! He motioned to me to come closer, and said, “Mag ik je mobiel zien?”  It took me a moment and him gesturing to the phone in my hand for me to realize he wanted to see my phone.  In confusion, I silently opened it and handed it to him.  He searched briefly before opening my Instagram account.  He motioned me over and, to my surprise, took the best picture I had ever seen.  The contrast was phenomenal and the focus was set on our eyes.  He seemed to capture an incredible amount of emotion in a single frame.  With a quick smile and a twinkle in his eye, he stepped back into his frame and slowly transitioned back to the painting I was so familiar with.  It took me a couple of moments for my mind to adjust, then I smiled as I walked away.  Rembrandt always did love a selfie\!  
